# Papers and Poster Abstracts
Building an Ontology of Pain
	Pain data is important for both the management of pain and treatment of its underlying causes. This data is commonly collected through standardized pain testing procedures, such as Quantitative Sensory Testing (Mücke et al. 2021). Data about pain can be recorded using several pain scales, such as the Kohn Reactivity Scale (Kohn 1985), and questionnaires, such as the McGill Pain Questionnaire (Melzack 1975). Due to the heterogeneity of these datasets, it is critical to develop a common semantic framework that can integrate this data. We propose the Pain Ontology to unify data about pain, including information drawn from the types of sources listed above. To represent an individual’s experience of pain, we utilize the term ‘feeling of pain’ from the Emotion Ontology (MFOEM). We considered several other definitions for the experience of pain and rejected them in favor of the MFOEM definition. For instance, both the Human Phenotype Ontology and NCI Thesaurus treat pain as a symptom of a disease, but pain does not necessarily indicate pathology. We also represent the feeling of pain as a process, whereas both the Ontology for MIRNA Target and the Experimental Factor Ontology treat pain as a quality. To relate the feeling of pain to the location in which the pain is occurring, we define the relation ‘perceived to occur in’. To guide the bottom-up development of the ontology, we are utilizing the publicly available Orofacial Pain: Prospective Evaluation and Risk Assessment (OPPERA) study and the International Classification of Orofacial Pain (ICOP). OPPERA examines factors that lead to painful, chronic temporomandibular joint disorders using the OPPERA Comprehensive Pain and Symptom Questionnaire (Maixner 2012). This study offers extensive and high-quality pain related data. ICOP (2020) contains an extensive list of terms related to orofacial pain, including definitions, which can be represented in the Pain Ontology.
If we have room, add citations.
Keywords: pain; ontology; pain data; pain perception; pain scale; orofacial pain; quantitative sensory testing
References
Hastings, Janna, Werner Ceusters, Barry Smith, Kevin Mulligan, Dispositions and Processes in the Emotion Ontology, in Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Biomedical Ontology, CEUR Workshop Proceedings (2011).
Kohn PM, Sensation-seeking, augmenting-reducing, and strength of the nervous system, in: JT Spence, CE Izard (Eds.), Motivation, Emotion, and Personality: Proceedings of the XXIII International Congress of Psychology, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1985, pp. 167–173.
Maixner, William, Luda Diatchenko, Ronald Dubner, Roger Fillingem, Joel Greenspan, Charles Knott, Richard Ohrbach, Bruce Weir, Gary Slade, Orofacial Pain Prospective Evaluation and Risk Assessment Study - The OPPERA Study, The Journal of Pain (2012), volume 12(11), doi:10.1016/jpain.2011.08.002.
International Classification of Orofacial Pain, 1st edition (ICOP), Cephalalgia (2020), volume 40(2), 129-221, doi:10.1177/0333102419893823.
Melzack, Ronald, The McGill Pain Questionnaire: major properties and scoring methods, Pain (1975), volume 1(3), 277–299. doi: 10.1016/0304-3959(75)90044-5.
Mücke, M, H. Cuhls, L. Radbruch, R. Baron, C. Maier, T. Tölle, R-D. Treede, R. Rolke, Quantitative sensory testing (QST). English version, Shmerz (2021), volume 35(3), 153–160. doi:10.1007/s00482-015-0093-2.


